---
title: Artwork Solution
tags: work, smp, artworking
---

# The problem
Reprographic time is expensive. To have experts in colour, placing, and artworking 
performing menial tasks is a massive drain on costs. Unfortunately, this was exactly 
what was happening, repro experts having to tell our client teams that an artwork of 
the wrong size had been uploaded regularly.

Additionally, with the advent of 'Print Management' companies, some of the industry
experience with artworking has been lost. This results in less competent artworkers 
producing artwork for us to print. Ultimately, this pushes the work back 'down' to the
printer.

# Considerations
Client experience is always a difficult one to juggle with technology. By adding in 
more automation and decreasing the human touch, clients can feel a less bespoke 
experience.

# Technologies

Building a completely bespoke solution is obviously an over complication, therefore we 
used an almalganation of technologies blended together. For the initial proof-of-concept
frontend we utilised [Monday](www.monday.com), a bespoke internal API, 
[ESCore](https://www.dalim.com/en/products/es) for internal pipelining, 
[IMP](https://insoftautomation.com/) for laydown placement, and
[Switch](https://www.enfocus.com/en/solutions/automated-preflight) for preflighting.

# Solution

We have two solutions implemented, the first, out of home (OOH), is a similification of 
point of sale (PoS), in so much as there are a set number of specifications to be 
considered. However, due to the percieved 'simplicity' of OOH, there is a human 
expectation that any automations are 'further reaching'.

## OOH
### Process
A line is created on Monday describing the specific format required, and the quanitity
requested. The cost is auto-generated via the client's ratecard, and returned for them
to confirm. Simultaneously, artworks can be uploaded, preflighted automatically, and 
the result returned to the client. This allows them to re-upload artwork if it doesn't
pass and get results in c. 5minutes. Additionally, if the result does pass, the artworks
are returned to the client for approval, and assuming they approve it, move 
automatically to press.

There are a couple more levels of complexity to this, rather than returning every error
to the client, we want to hold some back for us internally to fix. This resulted in a 
traffic light system; pass, warn, and fail. Passes move straight through the system,
failures halt immediately requiring a new file from the client. Warnings are the most
complex, depending on the warning generated by Switch we would hold the file at 
different stages. For example, there might be a warning which only makes sense for our
client servicing department to handle, alternatively (and most of the time) it might 
be only possible for repro to fix.

All of the pipelining happened through our internal API into ESCore, via an FTP. The
key feature we utilised here were ESCore's built in 'scriptsteps' which allowed 
arbitrary code execution. This enabled us to 'talk back' to Monday, and utilise Monday's
webhooks to 'talk back' to ESCore.

## Point of Sale
### Process
Due to the variablility of PoS we capture lots more data up front. We have a mapping 
from client data into our internal system. When a new specification of item enters our 
system, someone on the client team fills out the required information for it to pass
through our systems. Similarly to the OOH process, the client uploads artworks to Monday.
However, in this case the lines are pre-generated from the data the client provides to 
us. Thus, the client simply uploads artworks to the given lines.
